OK, we've talked about statistics, we've talked about linear programming.
Linear programming assumes that you are in the deterministic world.
When we were solving the problem about nuts, we secretly assumed that all the nut mixtures that we produce would be bought from us.
And at the prices that we set.
But are we always so sure?
Of course, not always.
In fact, it is unlikely that a person can be so seriously sure, except if we are talking about abstract mathematics.
Imagine this situation.
You are a boy who sells newspapers.
You buy newspapers from the editorial office for $1 and sell them for $2.
If you fail to sell all the newspapers, the editorial office is so kind to you that they take these newspapers from you for 50 cents each.
You are a smart boy, and you have managed to calculate that the average demand for your newspapers is 100 pieces a day.
But this is the average demand.
And the standard deviation is, let's say, 20 newspapers.
Under the conditions of this task, what should be the optimal order?
As usual, we optimize the profit.
It should be less than 100, exactly 100, more than 100.
And if it is more than 100 or less than 100, then how much should it be more or less?
Here a certain uncertainty is involved.
Uncertainty is a concept that is wider than probability, as we have already noted.
Nevertheless, we will consider that in this case we are dealing not with uncertainty as such, but with its part, probability.
In general, this particular task has a fairly accurate solution.
But for solving such a task, the so-called Monte Carlo method is used.
A beautiful and loud name.
Everyone immediately imagines a James Bond who sits in Monte Carlo and wins roulette.
But in fact, the Monte Carlo method is a method of numerical solving of tasks by a certain random number generator.
In Excel, in Russian-language Excel, the function that generates random numbers is called solchisl.
In general, in all other programming languages, it is called rand, from the word random, from English.
This function gives the value of the evenly distributed interval from 0 to 1.
Why exactly from 0 to 1?
Because the probability can take a value from 0 to 1.
Accordingly, the value of the solchisl function is distributed from 0 to 1.
How can we use the solchisl function to create a different distribution, different from the evenly distributed interval from 0 to 1?
For these purposes, the so-called reverse distribution serves.
In our case, since we believe that the sales of newspapers are distributed normally, we will use the function that in Russian Excel is called normstobr.
Normal standard reverse distribution.
What will such a function do?
Normal cumulative distribution looks like this.
It increases smoothly and decreases to 1.
Thus, the solchisl function, the random number, imagine an interval from 0 to 1, where this function is.
The random number will give the value from 0 to 1.
Accordingly, we will look for the corresponding point on this graph, horizontally.
And then we will mark the number of standard deviations on which this point is located.
Generating the random number that has the corresponding distribution, we will repeat this process many times.
And we will get the result that we can already work with.
In the case of a boy, we will generate the sequence of demand for his product and compare which of the orders will lead to the highest profit.
It should be noted that this is not a Svender model, this is not the only task that can be solved in this way.
Of course, the Monte Carlo method can solve anything.
Therefore, as an example, we will look at the modeling of gambling games.
Gambling games are a very favorable ground for the implementation of the Monte Carlo method.
For one simple reason, the uncertainty used there is almost a pure probability.
And, of course, no one is trying to deceive you.
Yes, the Monte Carlo method lacks elegance and strictness.
Of course, sophisticated mathematicians will never accept the results obtained by the Monte Carlo method as proof.
This is natural.
The solution to the Monte Carlo method may require significant computational power.
Here the so-called curse of dimensionality begins to work.
Imagine that you are modeling the American option using the Monte Carlo method.
The American option is an option that can be implemented at any time between the start and the end of its operation.
You will have to model the duration of the option for 90 days.
And you want to simulate, do a thousand simulations every time.
For example, you do a thousand simulations on the first day.
At the end of the first day, at the end of each simulation, you do a thousand simulations.
This is already a million.
On the third day, you do a billion.
On the fourth day, you do a trillion.
By the 90th day, the computational power of all existing computers will be exhausted.
Unfortunately, yes, sometimes this requires significant computational power.
But, fortunately, not always.
Therefore, the Monte Carlo method is quite effective in some cases and is practically impossible to use in others.
What else is necessary from the Monte Carlo method?
It is desirable to have a reliable and reproducible random number generator.
Why should the random number generator be reproducible?
If you change something in your model, you must understand that the result that appeared is primarily due to changes in the model,
and not to changes in the fact that you have completely different random numbers.
Such a thing as reproducibility is a very useful thing.
It should be noted that the random number generators used in the Monte Carlo method are based on simple numbers,
on a pair of two simple numbers.
And recently, the calculation of random numbers has become a serious business.
As I promised, the task is simpler.
Or more complicated, as you like.
The task is as follows.
You come to the casino and play such a game.
The probability of winning is 52%.
You have a large amount of money with you, 10 thousand dollars.
Since you know that your game is winnable, you choose which bet to make.
4% of your prosperity or 15% of the prosperity of what you have now.
At the same time, since the game is quite strange, you play exactly a thousand times,
and your goal is to take as much money as possible with you.
Or, if you want, you can look at it differently.
Two different players come to the casino.
Player 2, who always bets 4%,
and Player 1, who always bets 15% of what he has in stock.
Let's see.
Here is a graph of how the amount at the disposal of a particular player will change.
Okay.
Well, here they are both unlucky.
Here, despite the fact that the game was winnable,
both of them lost.
But pay attention.
Player 1, who bets 15% of his prosperity, has lost a long time ago and hopelessly.
Player 2 still has some money.
Now I will press the F9 button,
and thus every time a new round will be re-read, a new thousand games.
Here, Player 1 seems to be even lucky.
Player 1 earned more than $ 90,000 at some point.
Well, that is, 110,000 minus about 10,000, with which he came.
But in the end, everything returned to its own in the circle,
and Player 1 went bankrupt.
While Player 2 fluctuated a little,
and in the end remained with a more or less noticeable and acceptable amount.
So, no matter how many times we press the F9 button,
almost always a player who bets a smaller amount will win.
Pay attention, he is in lilac.
Here, even a decent amount is earned.
And so on.
In exceptional cases, under conditions of very high luck,
Player 1 will win.
But this will be extremely rare.
The situation will worsen even more
if we change the probability of winning from 52% to, say, 50.2%.
Here, in fact, it is 50.2%,
I will show that it is really 50.2%.
Then we need to bet not even 4%, but 0.4%
so that our money grows as fast as possible.
Let's see.
The game is quite boring for the player.
But if you pay attention, the game of Player 1 is very fun,
but nevertheless completely unprofitable.
And of course, we laid some unrealistic assumptions
that the probability of winning is 50.2%.
Of course, the probability of winning is never 50%.
With a probability of winning of 49%,
the question of how much to bet has a very simple answer.
Well, in general, not much.
Although sometimes, as you can see,
in some cases, one or another player will either remain practically at 0%
or lose a little bit.
But if you pay attention, a player who bets 15% of his state
loses under such conditions guaranteed and very, very quickly.
This task, in this case, is solved by the Monte Carlo method,
simulating the existing values.
Let's return to the task of the newspaper seller.
As I said, the price of the newspaper purchase is $ 1,
the price of the newspaper sale is $ 2.
What is called an underage cost,
the under-order price is $ 1,
the overage cost is $ 0.50.
That is, the publisher buys the newspaper purchased for $ 1 for $ 0.50.
The average demand for the newspaper is 100,
the standard deviation is 20.
What are we going to do here?
We will simulate the demand.
It will be distributed approximately normally.
The distribution will be slightly different from the normal,
but this is not very critical.
We will simulate the demand
and we will see how the level of the order affects it.
In this line, we have different boys.
One boy orders 106 newspapers, the other 108, the third 110, the fourth 112, and so on.
We will see how the order amount affects the profit they receive.
Here is a simple macro that will generate demand.
We will run it now and leave it for a while.
We will leave the computer to count for a while.
As you can see, we have generated a little more than a thousand different demand values.
We will build a graph of how the order level affects our profit.
Here are several different order levels and the profit that corresponds to them.
We will insert a graph here.
As usual, it will be a point graph.
We will use our order as x, and our profit as y.
The graph shows that the optimal order will be somewhere around $108-110.
The optimal order is affected by several conditions.
In particular, the fact that we used a slightly shifted distribution.
In addition, each time we generate a new batch of data, we will fluctuate around the optimal order.
In fact, the optimal order is somewhere around $112-113.
It would seem that there is not much difference between a person who ordered 124 and a person who ordered 108.
The difference is literally $3,000.
But let's think about it.
There are no other possible expenses on this graph.
In particular, rent, food, etc.
Imagine that the necessary expenses are $90,000.
Thus, a person who ordered 124 newspapers gets a profit of just under $1,000.
While a person who ordered 108 newspapers gets a profit of almost $4,000.
This is almost four times higher than the level of 124 newspapers.
Or, of course, the 100 newspapers will be located at the level of $92,000.
Nevertheless, the difference will be significant.
If we are talking about profits, not sales, then the difference will be significant.
Let's look at our distribution histogram.
It looks like a normal distribution.
Note that the demand was several times lower at the level of zero.
Of course, we limited the demand from the bottom to zero.
It is unlikely that someone will come and sell a boy a newspaper.
Nevertheless, the demand was several times lower.
Note that our average is only about 100 newspapers.
The demand was several times higher.
Fortunately, the model of newspaper sellers has a strict solution.
You can find it in the course application.
The point is not in a strict solution.
The point is that we can solve quite difficult tasks using the Monte Carlo method.
Traditionally, after the end of the course, there are two tasks,
and then, after a while, the solution of all six tasks.
The first task was given at the Moscow City Mathematical Olympiad for fifth-grade students.
Two friends in the park meet.
Hello, hello, long time no see.
Are you married? Yes.
Do you have children? Yes.
Do you have two sons? Yes.
How old are they?
The number of their ages is the number of pigeons on that bench.
The person thinks and says, I am not old enough.
I forgot to tell you, the older one looks like a mother.
Then it is clear.
According to the available and the missing data,
you should guess how old the sons of the second friend are.
Another task.
Imagine that you have your eyes tightly closed,
and in front of you on the table is a collection of coins.
Some unknown number.
Of course, you can count them even with your eyes closed.
It is known that exactly 26 coins lie upside down.
The coins need to be divided into two piles,
so that there is an equal number of coins in each pile.
And you, since your eyes are closed,
cannot distinguish the top of the head from the tail,
and cannot distinguish by touch how the coin lies.
That is, a hint.
All you can do with coins is count and flip.
The first task.
A boat floats in the pool.
There is a 32-kilogram cast-iron boat at the bottom.
The boat is thrown into the pool.
How will the water level in the pool change?
The water level in the pool will decrease.
The fact is that while the boat is in the boat,
the boat can hold the amount of water equal to its mass,
that is, 32 kilograms or 32 liters.
Since the liter was chosen.
No, the kilogram was chosen.
Accordingly, when the boat is at the bottom,
it can hold not 32 kilograms or 32 liters of water,
but only the volume that it takes.
It takes about 4 liters.
The density of cast-iron is about 8.
32 kilograms divided by 8.
The total volume of the boat is about 4 liters.
In the pool, the water level has decreased by 28 liters.
That is, the water level will decrease.
Next.
The lever scales on which a glass of water is attached.
You put your finger in this glass.
Of course, without separating it.
Yes, it seems that you hold your finger yourself.
However, you probably do not take into account that...
And those of you who guessed before, well done, of course.
You do not take into account that in order to push your finger into the water,
you overcome some resistance.
Some resistance of water.
What happens in this case?
From the point of view of the glass, by the way.
The water level rises in the glass.
And from the point of view of the glass,
it does not know anything about what is in it.
The water level has risen.
The pressure has increased.
The glass honestly transfers this pressure further,
that is, it presses on the scales.
And the glass will overweigh.
That is, from the point of view of the glass, it has become heavier.
The task with the bridge.
Well, most often, the first thing that comes to mind is to send the fastest one,
and let him run, wear this flashlight.
This way you will get the result in 19 minutes.
You can check.
In fact, there is a general operating principle.
What exactly?
The principle is quite simple.
If you have two long processes,
they need to be launched in parallel, if possible.
Thus, those people who go 5 and 10 minutes should go together.
How to do this?
Well, of course, they cannot be launched first.
So, the first ones should be those who pass the bridge in one minute and two minutes.
Then one of them, regardless of which one, should return, give the flashlight.
Then 5 and 10 should go to the other side of the river.
The second of the first two should return, and again they should pass again.
Thus, we get 2 minutes there, 1 minute back,
this is 3 minutes, 10 minutes there, 13 minutes,
2 minutes back, 15 minutes, and 2 minutes forward, 17 minutes.
This way we get a decision that is almost 10% better than the decision that comes to mind automatically.
It seems to me that 5 minutes of thinking is worth 10% improvement in performance.
The task with the camel.
There is another general operating principle.
I will tell you which one.
The first one, how to solve it.
It becomes clear almost immediately that there is a trap.
If you load a camel with thousands of bananas and let it go to the maximum distance,
then, of course, the camel will not deliver any bananas.
Moreover, it will not be able to return even back.
All this camel tuning, self-loading, self-unloading,
the system of cargo sustainability, GPS and the desert serve the same purpose.
The camel should be able to remove some part of the cargo from itself.
And then return to the same place, knowing that the cargo will remain in safety.
So, the first step to the solution would probably be, for example,
the camel takes a thousand bananas, goes 400 kilometers, throws 200 bananas,
returns back, takes a thousand again, goes 400 kilometers, throws 200 bananas,
returns back, takes a thousand, goes 400 kilometers.
Here we find that in the place where he left the bananas, 400 bananas are already lying.
And he ate 400 bananas.
He loads 400 bananas on himself, goes the remaining 600 kilometers,
and thus he can deliver 400 bananas.
Then the question arises, is this quantity maximum?
Maybe you can do something, if, for example, change the first pass of the camel?
Or maybe you can make more stops, and then the camel can deliver more?
It turns out that the general operational principle in this case is this.
If you have equipment, it is desirable that the equipment works with maximum load.
That is, we need to divide our thousand kilometers into points so that
the camel starts with maximum load from each point, from each new point.
That is, if it starts with a thousand bananas three times from the first point,
then from the second point it should start twice with a load of a thousand bananas,
and from the third point it should start once, but with a load of a thousand bananas.
If you write down the equation, it is actually the simplest.
To get to the first stop, the camel should go back and forth, back and forth, back and forth,
that is, five times.
During these five times, it should spend a thousand bananas.
It is easy to determine the distance it should cover, 200 kilometers.
Now we have 2,000 bananas left at the second point.
We need to go back and forth, and during this time spend a thousand bananas.
During this time, the distance should be 333.1 kilometers.
Thus, from the third point, which is 200 plus 333.1,
the camel starts again with a thousand bananas.
Well, how many bananas will it eat?
But it will be able to deliver the same 533.1.
This is the optimal amount, you can check it in other ways.
The task of the producer.
This is a rather interesting task, of course.
There is information, as you have probably already seen,
where it is, and where it is not.
Of course, the information starts with the phrase
that two sons of a preschooler are growing up.
We assume that a preschooler is a child who is 7 or younger.
What happens next?
The person says that the number of pigeons is equal to the number of adults
around that bench, and this is not enough.
That is, the solution is two-dimensional.
Let's think further.
What information is there that the elder looks like his mother?
Well, of course, not that he looks like her,
and not that he has a mother.
The information is that there is an elder.
So, before that, when the first friend said that he did not have enough information,
he was afraid that these sons could be twins.
But since he was afraid that the sons could be twins,
this greatly simplifies our decision.
We will look for an answer in advance among the full squares.
Thank God, there are not so many full squares.
For some reason, you can immediately discard such numbers as 3, 5 and 7.
Let's discuss.
Let's say we take 49.
There were 49 pigeons.
What options do we have?
Either 1 and 49, or 7 and 70.
49 is not the same preschooler.
7 and 7 are discarded because there is an elder.
Let's go further.
36.
What options are there?
6 and 6, 2 and 18.
18 is certainly not a preschooler.
3 and 12, 4 and 9.
9 is also not a preschooler.
25 is the same, since it is a simple number.
5 and 5, 1 and 25 do not work.
16 pigeons were possible.
What options are there?
1 and 16, 2 and 8, 4 and 4.
4 and 4, since there is an elder, is discarded.
2 and 8, 8 is a preschooler.
The same thing happens with 3 and 3, or 1 and 9.
9 is not a preschooler.
1 and 1, there is only one option left.
They are twins and they are one year old.
Accordingly, 4 remains.
2 and 2 are discarded.
The second son has 1 and 4 years.
Another question about coins.
The question is quite simple.
Pay attention.
The condition of the question says that the coins should be divided into two piles so that there is the same number of coins in each pile.
It is not said anywhere that there should be 13 coins.
It is said that there should be the same number of coins.
Thus, you can use the logic that a double negation is the same as a statement.
Or, to put it simply, minus to minus gives a plus.
You count 26 coins.
Let's say that among them there was a K, a coin with a cap up.
Then how many coins are left in the second pile?
26 minus K.
Now you turn the 26 coins that you counted, in which there was a K, a coin with a cap up.
And now there are 26 minus K coins in this pile.
That is, the K coins that were with a cap up are now with an eagle up.
And the coins that were with an eagle up, 26 minus K, in this pile, were in the right pile.
They are now with a cap up.
As we remember, 26 minus K remained in the left pile.
Thus, we got the same number of coins with a cap up.
There are many such tasks, such interesting tasks.
They need to be solved in order to make your brain work.
And solving them is very useful.
Thank you.
Thus, the course is over.
I would like to draw your special attention to such a part as statistics.
Of course, statistics is not necessarily a recurring thing.
But statistics often allows us in our, of course, stochastic world,
to get some more or less definite, if not forecasts,
then preliminary results, perhaps.
Let's call it that.
Because it is generally difficult to predict.
People do not predict well.
This has been proven many times.
Preliminary results that will help you to cope better with your business.
If you are engaged in business or with your own work,
if you are in some business and you are doing it.
Of course, such things as linear programming and Monte Carlo method are also extremely useful.
But still, I would advise you to pay the most attention to statistics.
Of course, the issue of the repeatability of statistics can be very difficult.
But, unfortunately, we have nothing else left,
or most often there is nothing else left,
but to believe that the conditions that existed in the past will be repeated in the future.
Study statistics, study its application in business and good luck to everyone.